# April 02, 2020 Meeting Notes
-----

**Notetakers:** Mark Cohen (MPC), Jason Williams (JWS), Rick Button (RBU), Dave Poole (DMP), Philip Chimento (PFC)

**In-person attendees:**

**Remote attendees:** Yulia Startsev (YSV), Mark Cohen (MPC), Jeff Long (JHL), Bradley Farias (BFS), Rick Button (RBU), Michael Ficarra (MF), Mathias Bynens (MB), Myles Borins (MBS), Caio Lima (CLA), Dave Poole (DMP), Jason Williams (JWS), Kevin Gibbons (KG), Chip Morningstar (CM), Philip Chimento (PFC), Mary Marchini (MAR), Rob Palmer (RPR), Ross Kirsling (RKG), Waldemar Horwat (WH), Pieter Ouwerkerk (POK), Bradford C. Smith (BCS), Ujjwal Sharma (USA), Richard Gibson (RGN), Felienne Hermans (FHS), Nicolò Ribaudo (NRO), Shane F Carr (SFC), Justin Ridgewell (JRL), Jack Works (JWK), Philipp Dunkel (PDL), Robin Ricard (RRD), Ben Newman (BN), Sergey Rubanov (SRV), Jordan Harband (JHD), Guilherme Hermeto (GHO), Robert Pamely (RPY), Edgar Barragan (EB), Mark Miller (MM), Hemanth HM (HHM), Aki (AKI), HE Shi-Jun (John Hax) [JHX], Daniel Rosenwasser (DRR), Min Qi Wu (MQW), Tantek Çelik (TEK), Nicolò Ribaudo (NRO)

## Remote Plenaries

Presenter: Myles Borins (MBS)

- [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1YNLe_xWNzk5KjASJQaYdrqwfIOcZony9bbL1aAelLOI/edit?usp=sharing)

MBS: (presents slides)

CM: My first take on this is I’m not wild about any of these proposals - they’re not terrible, but I feel ehh. For me, the amount of disruption to my normal work cadence for TC39 is more to do with how many days I commit to it than how many hours. Going to various formats that have us meeting more frequently, I understand the value of that with respect to standards work, but the concept of having more of my work days in a year disrupted due to TC39 meetings doesn’t fill me with joy.

MBS: One of the things about 3 or 4 days and blocking a day for this may not apply to all delegates. At least for myself in New York, when travelling for meeting, I have to block off 5 days where Monday and Friday are travel days, so the 4 or 5 day schedule was meant to match constraints such as those, and possibly even allow more time for non-committee work, where there would be an extra day where meetings were held that would normally be a travel day anyways, and that would free up more time.

CM: The comment about travel time is very on point. I’ve noticed that as we diversified our choice of venues requiring more travel for people in the bay area, that is an impact.I found even without the travel time the 3 days we've been doing online have been exhausting. There's a psychological energy that goes into the meetings, that doesn't apply to the travel days.

MBS: One of the things at least for myself is how to have that balance. It’s not great to be doing it live and being a guinea pig. We do find ourselves in this unfortunate circumstance, so I like the idea of trying a different format for June.

CM: Since we know we are going have to do remote anyway.

MBS: It’s worth discussing putting this back on the agenda in June. It would be worth discussing the rest of the year in this meeting, but the only thing we need to lock down in this meeting is June.

MPC: If we moved to a higher cadence of meeting but kept the number of days the same would that be amenable.

CM: That would be okay.

MPC: I wanted to express being in favour of 4 days 5 hours in June. Regarding separating the entire day for each meeting, I personally fell exactly the opposite. Especially if it is going to be remote, the longer days are more disruptive.

CM: The long meeting is much more draining in the remote mode, because you just sit in a chair not moving the whole time.

MBS: So i guess a question to that, do people have a preference for 5 days 4 hours vs. 4 days 5 hours?
MLS: I like 4 days  5 hours.

CM: Yes.

YSV: Same here.

GHO: Yes, if it’s remote.

PDL: I wanted to express the thought that having remote as a fallback option isn't what we should be doing. I think we should actually make the assertion that for at least 2020 but possibly - going with WH whose next topic says 18 months - I'd love that, actually make the clear assertion that it allows for clear planning saying: "we are going to be remote for that period of time". Halfway planning / hoping that we might travel at some point is more exhausting than just saying you know what, let's do it remotely, and structure it to work efficiently remotely, working to figure out what works, for example bringing more members into the meeting. If you make it a fallback you have what we have now. Very long meetings, utterly exhausting, that are in a timezone that’s only true because it’s the timezone the sponsoring party would have been in, and it really works for nobody outside the Bay Area. So instead, let’s make the decision that we will be remote for the next 18 months, make that the way we plan it, and experiment a little with variations as to get the best possible representation of all ECMA members that are a part of this. I think that’s actually much more valuable than thinking of a fallback.

WH: I was really hurt by the rude remark on github, when I suggested the June meeting needed to be remote only. That was uncalled for. Looking at the academics, it won’t be safe to travel until a vaccine is deployed, which experts say could take a year to 18 months. Meetings like this are efficient ways to spread the virus. One of the ways in which the US got infected was the BioGen meeting, which was a meeting of BioGen managers in a similar format to this. 108 people got infected and a number of people died from that. In person meetings I don’t think are feasible until we have a vaccine or a cure.

Regarding the scheduling my preference is the current schedule of 3 days.
The problem with using more days is the jet lag if we start messing around with the timezones. That’s also a problem with more frequent, like monthly meetings. If i have to do a meeting between midnight and 5am (my time) then that would put me out of commission for a few days, just due to jet lag. So I would rather have longer meetings, and if we need to mess with timezones, I’d rather do it all at once rather than once a month.

LEO: I agree scientifically that we can't expect a miracle, we need to wait for data. Considering what I've heard, we are not going to have an update in the next 2 months. So I honestly would rather not make travel plans for at least 2020. This is my approach to it because I don’t know what to expect, and I need to figure out what it’s going to be like in the next few months to figure out what I’ll be doing in the meeting, so I think it’s much safer to say we just won’t travel in 2020.

MM: I agree with many of the things that have been said. I'd like to add, even if a vaccine were discovered tomorrow and we were all immune and safe soon, I would advocate that we permanently move to only-remote meetings. The reason is that my experience up til now has been that often it’s quite burdensome to travel, so I've occasionally tried the remote option. Each time it's been a really terrible experience. It’s always for me and my own experience it sucked to be remote for an in person meeting. These last few days have really worked well, as a remote attendee the experience was really comparable in terms of productivity and in terms of our ability to communicate - and this was our first one, we’re still debugging the process. I think putting it online-only brings up the quality of the online experience to the level of the in-person experience.

LEO: I have strong support for the monthly remote meetings. As I like the in person meetings I would love to keep in person meetings, but definitely not for 2020. I’d love to have this merging of monthly meetings and in person meetings. I’m not going to say anything about how many days because I’m flexible about it, so it should be what fits best for TC39. This meeting, for being a full-remote meeting, has been very productive as MM said.

PDL: I second what MM said.

WH: Remote only meetings may not be sustainable, as we all know each other but as new delegates join they will not know everyone as well. The hallway conversations in this meeting did not work at all for me.

JHD: I don’t agree with MM, I don’t think this has worked anywhere close to as well as the in-person meetings. This is definitely going to be the best experience for a remote attendee because we’re all remote - that’s not arguable, when everyone is remote the remote experience is better. But I think there is a huge loss if we never did an in person meeting. Even if the tooling gets better, I think there is a lot of - I’m trying not to relate it to Asimov, there is a lot of socialization that humans thrive on, more subtle cues, that 2d video doesn’t replicate. We need to see each other every now and then. When we are talking about this we are talking about two different time periods. During it, sure, we’re obviously only going to have remote meetings - everyone would have to be comfortable traveling, everyone’s companies, every host country would have to be comfortable, so that’s clearly a ways out. But at the time that that happens, I would hope that we could restore the in-person plenaries.

LEO: Are you supporting in person meetings for this year as well?

JHD: Like I said, the conditions for when we could have an in-person meeting are many, it requires agreement from people, companies, countries, medical experts. I am certainly hopeful it will be this year, but a more realistic view is that it will not be this year. I understand that planning an in person meeting that the host needs lead time. And the uncertainty in that lead time causes issues. So it may not be fair to the July, September, November meetings to leave them planned in person given the likelihood that they will be cancelled.

I do hope that as soon as things are cleared up, getting in person meetings planned again.

MPC: I think the in person meetings are important, I think reducing them is important, but not entirely. I agree with JHD that it will be fluid this year/ next year. To WH point, I found hubs to be effective as a hallway track emulator. The thing I found is it requires everyone to use , If there are only 5 people in there, it's not really a hallway track, because you can't go find someone who's not there. I encourage everyone to use hubs more.

MBS: One of the things I want to mention - I agree that this meeting has been surprisingly productive with all of the different things we've had on our selves, its not been without its hiccup, those are working notes we'll have to carry out. Although I am confident that it will get better with time. I see a few people who have added comments in the queue that maybe our ability to do this is very much due to the personal relationships we have built up from working together over the past few years. I think it’s also very reasonable to think about, I’m not sure this is the case, but I think a lot of the people who have been more vocal in the remote plenary are the people who have a longer history with the committee. I do think that maintaining some level of in person whatever it is, we can still discuss what that means but some sort of our committee that's met in person when its important to do so is important for onboarding new members, building new relationships and maintaining existing ones.

WH: To reply to MPC, the hallway track didn't work for me. Hubs makes my computer go haywire. I had a really bad experience with Zoom breakouts — it took a long time and many attempts to get the right people into a breakout session, and that was with extensive moderator help. I wasn't able to set one up on my own without the help of moderators. There is just no way to grab somebody in a hallway and chat with them during a break. We have no good solution for that.

MLS: I second what MBS said, I believe this did work because of the rapport we have, especially for the people who have been attending a year or two, or longer. I agree that 2020 I don’t think we’re going to be able to see each other face-to-face, given the way things are going. I concur that hubs - didn’t give it much chance. I had IRC open, I had the presentation, everybody's    face, hubs is one too many things to figure out how to work. I agree the hallway channel - we need to figure out a better solution until we meet face to face. I’d advocate that we meet face to face regularly. Originally I was saying that the 3 days and longer days would be better, but because of time zones, I actually think that 4 days shorter schedule would be better.

CM: I second the various comments about how we are leveraging our personal relationships that are rooted in our face to face meetings. It will be difficult for new people to build those kinds of relationships. I think that Hubs as an experiment was very much worth trying, but in contrast to MPC’s comment I think it was a total and utter failure, it just does not work on any level for me. Maybe some of this is colored for me by the fact that I’ve been doing VR stuff since the 1990s and this felt like a 1990s VR demo to me. There may be other tools, and the selective pressure for people to come up with alternatives will get stronger so I don’t think it’s a complete write-off, but I think I'd pronounce the Hubs experiment a failure.

MBS: The chair team will continue to explore different tech for the remote meetings and improve the experience. That includes using zoom as the main tech. I think zoom did well handling the meeting. But I would be lying if I said I wasn’t concerned about some of the privacy issues Zoom was having, and the breakout rooms tool was a failure for our flexibility. I at least will be exploring other technologies that we can look at, although to be honest I’m not bullish on moving off of zoom - privacy concerns be damned, because it worked. I am skittish for that reason.

JWK: +1 for longer meetings instead of messing with timezones. If it’s going to be 4 days or more we should avoid someone joining the meeting at 0am. It’s 1am here in UTC+8 and it’s hard to get focused to stay up all night. Maybe we should find an acceptable time ??? for everyone, and reduce the number of people meeting in the midnight to 6am window. We should try to avoid someone always stay up at night because their acceptable range is in the minority.

RPR: To be clear, when you say shorter meetings you mean fewer hours in the session?

JWK: I mean fewer days in the session.

MBS: Is preferable?

JWK: Yes.

MBS: So you’d prefer fewer sessions with longer hours, even if we offset those [shorter] sessions to be more accommodating with the time?

JWK: Yes.

MBS: Ok.

YSV: Thanks for the feedback on hubs. I am happy if we experiment some more. I did get kind of lost in this meeting.
There were a select group of people in the Hubs and the conversations as we thought they’d happen didn’t really happen, we had everyone in a single group not really breaking out into smaller groups. The thing we thought would be cool was to have multiple conversations using the proximity based audio with people moving around. That didn’t really happen .I ‘m open to suggestions as to what we should do. Or, if people haven't had a chance to try it with more than 10 people in the room, we should try it out with more people. There is also the technical issue that it is a bit heavy on the CPU.

MM: The US has an oppressive border policy. Some other standards committees I’ve heard have already adopted a policy of not meeting in the US because of that border policy.
The bad policy of the US Gov should not be a burden on everyone else. Even if the timezone keeps us in pacific time, that can still be Canada. So we’ve got 18 months probably before we resume in-person, so there’s no rush to make a decision on this, but I really think that the - just like we don’t sign NDAs, we force the host company to change their policy to not require that, we should adopt the same mindset around the border policy.

WH: I don’t know what you mean by the oppressive policy. Many of our countries have closed borders altogether; the US is one of the few exceptions that hasn’t.

MM: I’m not talking about in response to COVID. I’m talking about before that, since I’m a US citizen I haven’t experienced any of this myself, I’ve only heard secondhand and third hand -

MBS: Point of order, we should hold off on discussion on “where” until we decide “if”.

MM: Ok, I agree with that.

AKI: Far be it from me to ever want to stop a conversation about how terrible US border policy is, but I think that’s a conversation for a later date, or at least a later hour.

MBS: To be clear, I really think that this is something we should discuss. For the sake of time, and for the sentiment that June will be remote, I’d like to reach consensus on that.

BT: For the people who are sad to miss out on the in-person plenaries, which is something I agree with, how would you feel about some more conference style where we are not actually advancing proposals but getting together in a less normative way.

WH: If I’m going to travel to someplace, I want to get some work done. It would be very hard to justify traveling someplace that’s not a normative meeting.

BT: It’s still a meeting, you’re still giving presentations… I agree, it would be harder to justify, if you’re not advancing proposals, but it would be an opportunity to collaborate and prepare for future meetings.

WH: I couldn't justify that in good faith to my manager.

LEO: We can advance proposals if we are meeting informally (?) But honestly I think we should be using conferences that already exist for informal meetings, and not create something from TC39.

BT: I don’t mean a literal conference we open to everyone, but a more optional opportunity for a hallway track.

LEO: For that, I think it’s complicated for that to be organized by TC39, and I agree with the sentiment that TC39 should not be organizing informal meetings.

BT: That’s what plenary is though.

LEO: Right, non-normative plenaries would be informal. I have mixed feelings, although i want to support people meeting all the time.

MBS: For the Node.js project, we do bi-annual collaborators summit, different people working on specific things. It’s maybe more akin to SYG’s incubator calls than the current proposal. But NodeJS for example piggy-backs on existing conferences. Independent of the format that we use, we could consider pairing the events with others events (what we did with JSConf in Berlin for example).

MBS: There are handful of advantages of this depending on where or how we are hosting. If the OpenJS foundation is booking a venue, If we could piggy-back on them and become part of a larger contract, it’s easier to cancel things if we need to cancel things as part of a larger group. Perhaps if we need to change plans we could change plans to travel to another event. That’s just something I wanted to consider aside from the normative/non-normative question.

JHD: There's been a lot of progress that's happened from hallway and dinner conversation while the normative sessions are going on. And just having a big non-normative conference wouldn’t achieve that, I think we’d be very frustrated by the inability to make progress during those time periods. Any momentum gained by having those in person conversations would be lost by the next plenary.

BT: Thank you for the feedback.

API: Having a dedicated separate zoom room to go to for a hallway track might work a bit better, think of it like lunch tables. There are some other random people there and you kind of chat.

MPC: we trialed breakout rooms, but it wasn’t great because there were techincal issues. You have to make everyone a cohost to allow them to travel. Even then, people were having trouble because e.g. buttons didn't show up. It wasn't a very good experience.

MBS: I think that what API is suggesting is slightly different, the breakout rooms were not super successful, we could explore having multiple zooms. The one thing is that for most accounts with Zoom, you’re charged per license and we’d have to pay for multiple licenses.

API: I’d love to experiment with it. That is what I was thinking, create Table 1/2/3, “hey jump to room 6”. I’d love to experiment at this plenary and other plenaries.

MBS: Two things that would make sense here, a group should investigate the software stack that Bloomberg has, and second, I can follow up with ECMA management for getting multiple rooms in Zoom, it is probably less than $1000 for multiple rooms. Since ECMA is saving money by not paying for dinners for these meetings, I think it is reasonable to ask for financial support here.

SFC: I just joined in the meeting but I read through some of the notes. I’m all in favor of making a contingency plan for when we need to turn in-person plenaries into remote plenaries. Some of these questions about timezones, duration, length, are great questions to answer and I think that’s what this conversation should be answering. We can think about for 2021 and beyond, we can think about the cadence to be. For the second half of 2020: we're not epidemiologists or public health experts, and we don't know what the world is going to look like. My team is still planning an i18n summit for the second half of 2020. As far as I can tell, conferences are still going on in the 2nd half of 2020, It’s just way too far out for us to knowfor sure. Trying to proactively say that everything in the 2nd half of 2020 has to be remote and deciding that now in early April is just not something we have the expertise to do. The experts have not taken these steps past June. I’m very strongly opposed to saying today that saying plenaries for the rest of 2020 are remote, I’m very strongly opposed to that. We should be deferring to the public health experts in our companies and in the public sphere. I am all in favor of making contingency plans if we need to invoke those.

WH: I strongly feel that this argument that we’re not epidemiologists therefore we don’t know what’s going to happen is factually incorrect. This is a math problem. If you need to solve a quadratic equation, you don’t need to defer to someone with a PhD in math for the answer. The answer depends on the inputs, and the inputs are all fairly obvious at this point. The way that epidemics work, unless they can get cases to zero worldwide they cannot relax restrictions until there is a cure or a vaccine. The experts are making directives through June or so simply because they will modify them a bit and extend them but it’s pretty clear what’s going to happen over the next year to 18 months. Until this is cleared up in all our countries it’s not going to be safe to travel because you don’t want to get infected and spread it to a place that doesn’t have it. This will be resolved only when there is a widely deployed vaccine or effective cure. I don’t know how long it will take us to find a cure. That requires a medical miracle. For a vaccine, every expert says that a vaccine will take a year to 18 months. I’m optimistic that they can do it a bit faster, but nobody is saying that we’ll have a vaccine deployed by June. So this is just a math problem, I know how to solve math problems, I can explain the reasoning to anyone who wants to hear offline, but I do not see it as reasonable to think we will travel by the end of the year, barring an effective cure.

MBS: As a chair, in making this decision that we would not be making lightly, I don’t think it is solely what is tracking the current pandemic. I think it is also delegate comfort. We have three companies that need to plan meetings. At least the delegate for this meeting, It was an ongoing back and forth with having to make a game-time decision, then it was a back and forth with PayPal as well. I think it allows us to lead as a group and say “maybe we can meet in person”
But for the sake of making things easier for people, for not having things up in the air. And we don’t know who in our group is immunocompromised, who is less willing to travel. And out of being fair to everyone, at least for 2020 let’s agree to this remote format. It also allows us to spread across and try things in 2020, so that come 2021 if we need to make similar decisions, then we have actively gone through a number of different things and worked out the kinks.
At a risk of sounding unempathetic this is an opportunity for us to walk out of it with better practices and experiences. Without making a strong decision now we are at risk of having to react and act quickly. I don’t think that is fair.

SFC: First I’ll respond to WH. We’re not public health professionals, and if you look at different countries around the world - I don’t want to dig into this - but countries all along the spectrum have had different ways of containing this virus such that you don’t have herd immunity, they have different ways of doing it.

WH: Nobody has managed to contain it and allow international travel. And that will continue as long as some parts of the world are infected.

SFC: China has domestic travel and China is a pretty big country. I think it’s not something that we should be saying that travel is not going to be done in H2 2020. You’re not an epidemiologist, I’m not an epidemiologist.

MBS: I would like to propose that we stop debating the safety of travel. At least for me moving 2020 has nothing to do with safety of travel. It is about delegate safety and comfort. Which are completely independent from the world situation.

SFC: I strongly agree with that and with PFC’s next point of order. I just think we should be deferring to the experts, it’s not productive to have those kinds of discussions here.

MBS: In this case the expertise is in Chairs saying that they don’t feel comfortable.

SFC: So the second part of my comment is replying to MBS, which is that we still have remote plenaries. If delegates don’t feel comfortable travelling, it’s the same as if they didn’t feel comfortable travelling in 2019, they can still join remotely. I personally find in person plenary more productive. I personally have been making plans for the rest of 2020. It’s disruptive to me if we’re not going to be having those remaining meetings in 2020. If delegates don’t feel comfortable travelling that is fine, we should make efforts to make plenary more remote friendly than in the past. We should be making in-person plenaries remote friendly. But for delegate planning, I understand it’s disruptive for other delegates that they have to figure out and plan travel, but it’s also disruptive to delegates like myself, to have to change plans.

LEO: SFC, on top of what you say, I agree with you, I prefer in person meetings. I am in agreement with a lot of things. I understand you have made plans. Making plans for me has a very high cost. API mentioned that it is a burden to host a meeting, and it is a burden to me to plan for a meeting. What I’m proposing here is playing more safe in terms of burden for the delegates - not even discussing pandemics, let’s put that aside - it’s hard for me to commit to a plan but having the plan on thin ice because I’m not sure if it is not going to happen. I prefer to play it safe with my plans for the year. I understand there is a lot of frustration involved. I prefer in person meetings over remote. For the burden of committing to travel plans it is really complicated in my case. The meeting in July would not be one I would be able to attend, it is too hard to commit myself to going there than dealing with going or not going. I need to make a plan this year.
We could probably find more people -

MBS: I’m not trying to be dismissive but I am personally finding this topic unproductive and in the interest of time I think we should move.

SFC: I disagree, I think the remaining queue items would be productive to hear.

BT: I disagree with that.

MBS: I also disagree with that.

MLS: When SYG brought up the issue in Hawaii, we talked about doing local groups, if conditions allow. But I agree that at least for the next year we are probably going to need to be remote.

DE: It’s been an interesting conversation, it seems like we will be stuck with remote plenaries at least for a little bit, and to talk about disruption, I'm happy that the chair group is on top of this, making things productive and comfortable for everyone. It’s been a very hard time for me personally not being able to travel right now. Right now the main thing to decide on is these different schedules, and I'm happy that MBS brought them up. I like the proposal of 4 days, 5 hours. Of the remote plenaries that I’ve been to, this is the most comfortable because of what folks have said about this being the most comfortable remote experience. I think more hallway track will be good, and like others, I have relationships that have built up over time.
I think there’s things we can borrow from other standards groups with making things more accessible and better for new people to join. I've personally had a lot of good personal connections with people in open source projects who I met only years later in person. It’s hard to build those communities. From here MBS used the word consensus, this isn’t something we plan by consensus. Meeting planning as I did some years and as AKI did for this year is not a consensus-driven process, it’s a process where we all give input and the chair group comes up with a plan and publishes it, and maybe takes more feedback. It’s not a thing where if we don’t get consensus we don’t do it. I’d like to encourage everyone to please give feedback on these schedules, either on IRC, or the Reflector, so the chair group can come back and make a call.

AKI: At the risk of sounding like a dictator, meeting planning would never happen if it was happening by consensus.

DE: Yes, maybe anyone who disagrees can - no, I’m not going to call for volunteers. I just want to say that the chair group has been on top of this, they’ve been talking about it -

AKI: Every single week for months!


DE: Right, so anyone who wants to join that process can try to join the chair group next year. It’s not like you make some comment that’s so insightful that everyone agrees.

MBS: Summarizing that there are things that we are discussing. I’d like to make a formal proposal, to what DE was saying I’m not asking for consensus. Just feedback. I suggest we do a 4 day 5 hour format, at the end of the June meeting we can discuss the 3 day vs 4 day format.

That we move the remaining 2020 meetings to be a remote format for the remainder of the year, and that the June meeting will happen in the timezone and at the times originally planned for the original host. But the timezones for the future meetings is something that the chair group will want to look into and come up with a proposal for. The proposal may take the shape of the current plan to go with the original timezones, but we’re not going to make a decision yet on that. I think it would be prudent to get through these topics now for 2020 before discussing other things. Did I miss anything that we intended to discuss?

BT: Just to be clear what we are proposing is no in person plenaries planned for 2020.

MBS: And that we’ll wait for the next meeting to lock in other things including how we will do things for 2021, but that for the june meeting it will be 4 days 5 hours, running in the timezone of Chicago. We will give an update for whether it will be Mon-Thurs or Tues-Friday.

SFC: I’m still strongly opposed to the idea for making calls for 2020, I think it’s too early to called. I think that the chair group should gather feedback from delegates to try to get a more quantitative sense for how disruptive changing the second half of 2020 plenaries would be, and then work with hosts to make that call. I don’t think that we have enough data right now to make that disruptive change.

AKI: We’ve gotten a lot of feedback. We’ve talked to a lot of people, basically every day since we got home from Hawaii.

BT: We are not doing in person plenary for 2020, that is what we have heard for 2020. This is a minority opinion by far.

MBS: I would also add that 60 people are on this call right now and nobody else seems to have a concern with that.

SYG: I want to clarify something that MBS said, given that we handle this in this meeting, I don’t think it will be productive to discuss planning at the next plenary as DE suggested, I think if folks feel very strongly they should individually reach out to chairs or comment on Github and then the chair group synthesizes that feedback and comes up with a plan. I think devoting an hour to this at the next meeting will eat up an hour with no results.

MBS: ONe thing we could do there SYG, which speaks to what LEO’s queue topic is - you’re going to be presenting on incubator calls soon, I think planning for meetings is something we could discuss in those incubator calls. I would be willing to participate in these calls even if the chair groups is making the decision.

BT: I also agree. What we can commit to as a chair group, is we will have a concrete proposal at the next meeting. And we’ll definitely have some conversation here, and I’m not comfortable with just saying here’s what we’re doing, but if there are no blocking issues we can then just shift to adopting that schedule.

MBS: It also looks like a question vanished. The possibility of spinning up another in person meeting. This has not been discussed by the chair group, so I’m only speaking for myself. I think it’s reasonable that if the situation gets better and there’s an organization willing to host, I think that it would be reasonable to revisit later in the year. I think that it is prudent for 2020, that we make this decision to cancel the existing meetings. But I don’t think that in the same way that today we’re deciding to change what we’ve done, in 4 or 6 months if the world situation is very different we can revisit the decision.

SFC: I’m fine with that compromise, that sounds reasonable to me.

MLS: The reason I want to revisit this is not in order to rehash whether we are in person or remote. I’d like to discuss iterating on and improving how things work, especially if we have another experiment for the hallway track, I’d like to discuss that in plenary.

SYG: That sounds great to me, to discuss logistics. Folks should be more aware when the conversations derail to who gets inconvenienced.

LEO: MBS answered my first question - the chairs are working on channels for feedback and I believe this is going on, and I believe the reflector would be the correct channel for it.
It comes with a suggestion, if you can present candidate solution before the meeting if we intend to have a discussion, please present something so we can mitigate details of the discussion. Today I kind of feel overwhelmed with all of the options. I prefer to work on top of a single option.

MBS: I’m open to receiving feedback and to discussing 1-1. You can email me, we can find time on the calendar together, there’s also a chair group email you can send things to. I’m always open to discussing things, I don’t know all the answers. Everyone’s feedback helps make these decisions.

## Atomics.waitAsync error rejection PR

Presenter: Shu-yu Guo (SYG)

- [PR](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-atomics-wait-async/pull/29)

SYG: (presents PR)

WH: In the `Atomics.compareExchange(…) != 0`, what happens if the result is compareExchange is 2?

SYG: That’s a good question. Is this code buggy? I think it’s not buggy, I think if it is 2 it’ll just go around the loop again.

WH: If we follow the wait(), it will be 2?

SYG: If it is 2 that means it's currently 2, it's already 2

WH: Yes.

SYG: Then this will wait, yes.

RW: Yes.

WH: It will wait for what?

SYG: It will wait for the unlock. And then if it’s in the contended state, there will be a notify call.

RW: Real quick, sorry, in that case isn’t the atom index 2 so when you get to await/async it’ll say -- nevermind, it will unlock

SYG: The fail fast case in the async version, it has to wait for a  ???

SYG: (continues to present PR)

WH: In the example in your presentation you have a timeout returning `{async: false, value: "timed-out"}`. Can you get timed-out results for both `async` true and false?

SYG: Yes, that’s correct. I don’t feel strongly about including or not including this. When the value you’ve passed in — 42 — is equal, the wait times out. Here it’s returning a timed-out result synchronously because the timeout interval was set to zero. There is no actual use case for observing the ???

WH: I’m not objecting to that, I just want to understand what’s going on here. Thank you.

JHD: I wanted to point out that during the async/await proposal, the committee discussed following the community best practice about always returning a promise or not returning a promise. There’s an [article you can google](https://blog.izs.me/2013/08/designing-apis-for-asynchrony ?) about unleashing zalgo by sometimes returning a promise. That’s why an async function can never return a non promise.

If it returns a promise it must always, it can return a container that might sometimes return a promise.

SYG: Those are the two options. This is why we can’t use typeof. Three years ago we decided against string | Promise, which goes against the web standards and platform.

MM: This is completely vague, but the only other place where we currently have a mixed synchronous/asynchronous situation is the coexistence of iterators and asyncIterators, and this auto-adaptation via a sync-to-async iterator converter, so I’m just wondering if there is anything to learn from that, and if there is anything we can do to make this follow some precedent set by that.

RW: MM, are you thinking that if for example, Atomics.waitAsync, depending on the context that it's called in, a protocol for determining how to do the right thing? For example, you would be able to call this thing's `[Symbol.asyncThing]()` and then that will definitely return a promise without leaving the program itself to determine what to do with a `.value`? Is that what you’re thinking?

MM: That is implied by the question. Now that you say it concretely it seems way more complicated than what was being proposed.

JHD: Also, the zalgo comment I was making would apply to that as well. Every calling pattern or zero calling patterns should produce a promise.

SYG: Yeah, that’s (sometimes returning a promise, sometimes not) a no go, a bad api design.

RW: You were saying something about adding a flag later, but then we can’t add a flag, but if we added a flag now it sort of still does break the contract of always a promise or never a promise. But it’s also a very clear indicator - if I’m the power user that opts into this allowing sync fail, that means this always works like Promise.resolve, like if you await a string you always get a string. Then clearly with a flag at the end, it might be enough of a clear indicator that the return of this would still work correctly.

SYG: In a vacuum, I see no technical arguments against that thing other than that it’s hard to type in a type system sense, so I think that situation is not ideal because it’s pretty close to zalgo, in that to avoid zalgo you have to understand the value you passed in, and it seems like this tagged union thing is cleaner.
If we take the assumption that it is for power users only is true, a boxed thing you have to branch on is no more onerous to me than having to pass in the flag.

RW: Given the arguments on the table, I think that I buy your argument and I’m willing to support- back you on that.

SYG: The general question I have is: Do folks find the performance edge-case footgun argument that I put forth compelling for changing the API?

MM: I do.

RW: I’ve seen it with the polyfill that I’ve written and you notice it. I’ve actually exercised this.

MAH: I’m not commenting at all one way or another, I just want to state that returning a thenable in the sync case would allow sync access and also calling `.then` in both branches.

SYG: No then-ables.

DE: It’s hard for me to see the substantial difference between a tagged union and an untagged thing. Initially, I felt like yeah we should always or never return a promise. But, whether we do a tagged union or an untagged thing, it feels substantially the same. It seems to me like the tagged union violates the design principles for the same reason that the untagged union violates the design principles. But on the other hand, the performance case seems essential, and it seems like it wouldn't work to use Promises for this. I feel like we should persist with the existing API.

SYG: Do you propose something that is not one of the three options here with no way to fail fast? If you believe the performance is important, we return an untagged union?

DE: Yeah. Untagged union.

SYG: So a fourth proposal.

DE: That's what it historically was.

SYG: Historically, the untagged union was either a Promise or a string. `typeof string` would be more robust than `instanceof Promise`. The argument against this in addition to ecosystem zalgo arguments that KG and others participated in is that it seems less ergonomic, It’s not immediately obvious from an untagged union.

DE: I’m okay with that. It does seem fundamentally similar, but-

SYG: I don’t think it’s an expressivity argument, I think it’s a matter of what’s less surprising to people in the ecosystem for this exceptional case. I don’t have any technical arguments for or against this use case.

DE: I’m ok with a tagged union. I see them as equivalent in terms of intuition because it’s following this pattern of it’s always a promise or not.

SYG: If you are OK with a tagged union I would like to ask if there are objections to option 3.

RW: Constraint: you actually need three proporties. You need something like `allSettled` has, which is a status property. Because if something happens during validation, the value is the exception.

SYG: If something happens during validation it throws. Since this is no longer an always async convention. We follow the convention of always throwing an error ???

RW: Does everybody here understand what that means? That that also requires you to wrap this in a try/catch?

WH: Under what conditions would it throw that are not program bugs?

SYG: IF the array buffer you pass in is not a SharedArrayBuffer.

RW: There are a number of reasons that cause it to throw, if it isn’t an SAB, if range error.

WH: Are there any that are not program bugs?

SYG: No.

RW: Unless you’re accepting like index values from user input or something without validating it.

SYG: And I think it’s fine in that in an async function, synchronous throws get converted to rejecting the promise. This requires more care, but I think you can’t get around it for the extra...
This is for compiling mutexes, given you are not writing it by hand, unlikely. This is for like the futex thing - if you need to generate a try/catch around it because this is that special, I can live with that. I hope atomics puts you in a different mode of thinking. That’s my hope anyways.

SYG: WH, would you object to having a tagged union?

WH: I would prefer an untagged union. The answer would be different if the non-promise result could be an arbitrary value, but given that the result is either one of two string constants or a promise, I feel that tagging doesn’t really buy you anything. However, I won’t object to having a tagged union.

SYG: I see.

WH: I would feel different if the result was not a promise or some other user supplied value.

SYG: Fair enough. But if you are not blocking -

WH: I’m not blocking.

SYG: For convention with the ecosystem, if no one is blocking I am happy assuming this is consensus.

RPR: To repeat, the consensus is…

SYG: Is number 3, to satisfy the performance goal I layed out, the wrapper has an own data property called async, when false the value property is either “not-equal” or “timed-out”, when true the value property is a promise. And validation errors are thrown as synchronous exceptions.

RPR: Are there any objections? No objections.

### Conclusion/Resolution
- Consensus reached for Option 3.


WH: [After lunch break] I really wish we had a good solution for the hallway track. There were a few difficulties that arose this morning and I had no good way of resolving them. Some of them are doable by GitHub but many are not; I’ve tried. An example of a conversation I wish I could do in a hallway track is the performance implications of always allocating a fresh object by `waitAsync`.

RW: I also just had some of the same conversations on that topic.


## Revisit WeakRefs FinalizationRegistry API change

Presenter: Keith Miller (KM)

- [previous discussion on April 1](https://github.com/tc39/notes/blob/master/meetings/2020-03/april-1.md#weakrefs-finalizationregistry-api-change)
- [pull request](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/pull/187)
- [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1mT9qcho2gGGDTNFd5KnOTvweJ9NFM_fbmxbGnZz5H4s/edit)

KM: (presents slides)

MM: We've discussed this on the GitHub thread, but I just don’t understand what the problem is with a long running single job application inside a worker running on the web. And the motivation for WASM that things forced their hand on WASM and on SAB when we approved them was the desire that game people had to take C/pthreads programs, compile them to WASM and run them on the web. Those old C/pthread applications are not going to be returning to the JavaScript event loop, so I don't understand the objection.

KM: The concern that we have overall with this is that yes I agree that games exist, I think SAB has use cases far beyond “i have a piece of code and I want to put it on the web”

MM: I would never have approved SAB on that rationale. It was the unstoppable pressure for games, and that was clear in the notes at the time.

KM: I respect that; I don't know that it means that anything similar in form must proceed.

MM: It means that we have already bought into the idea of supporting long running single job applications inside a worker. I don’t see a controversy there, and I don’t see a problem

KM: I think that it might come down to philosophical disagreement.

MM: Can you state the problem?

KM: Some of that is problematic for me - I get the point, but this is an opinion that goes high up the chain within the WebKit org, it is not something that I can even make a decision on now.

MM: At this point there has not been a stated problem I disagree with. I can't respond to an unstated problem.

KM: The problem is that people don't want… I think that your statement that we have already bought into long running things are supported may not be correct.
MM: I appreciate that it might be a controversial position. But I want to hear the problem with that position?

MM: Let’s say we had not bought into it at all. Why would it be controversial? What is the reason to avoid introducing a long running single job application in a worker?

KM: There are a couple of different things. One of the biggest historical problems is how do you handle termination of the main page (if I understand it correctly). It's not spec-complaint to kill a worker  if not waiting on the event loop.
There is a whole list of things - there is the quesiton of idle sleep, if the user is not doing something, does the long running event thing handle sleeping so that it doesn’t burn through battery life?

MM: It blocks on communication through a SAB.

KM: That’s certainly possible, I’m not arguing that it’s not possible. It’s that - how is that promoted in any way? It's not clear that those large-scale applications are going to work to make that a reality, even if the browsers have spent a lot of time trying to add that functionality to the web.

MM: I’ll leave it at that, you have given me what I asked for, some concrete objection.

GCL: Before when MM was enumerating the use case here, I just wanted to say that in node we have the same use case, and I wouldn’t want that to be cut off specifically because of concerns with the web.

KM: I don't have a problem with a proposal similar to SAB where it's normative optional, and the web works out that situation separately as part of WHATWG or I guess W3C, I’m not sure which one it would be in.

BFS: You don’t need to use a SAB to perform a sleep, in the wild there are examples of size 1 int32 array buffers to sleep with millisecond timeouts at the end. And so I don’t know where we could bring discussion of this to, because if the problem is creating a communications channel in order to perform a sleep, not all people in the wild are using a communications channel to perform a sleep, so it doesn’t seem required.

KM: Can you repeat? I'm not sure I follow.

BFS: So Atomics.wait has this time parameter on it in milliseconds. Some people allocate a SAB that is never shared, and they wait on it to perform a sleep.

KM: That's fair. I guess I'm not arguing so much that none of these things are possible. It's just that historically they weren't done even if it was possible.

BFS: Do we have a place we should be turning to about why they weren’t done?

KM: That’s not necessarily a question I’m able to answer because I didn’t necessarily work on those products or applications.

BFS: It would be nice if we had a place to get feedback so that we can see if we will run into a similar problem. If there is a concern, and it sounds like there is, it seem s like we should get more information than the fact that there is one. People are doing things that seem to work around the concern already in specific ways, and those workarounds may have inherent problems that we don't know about yet.

KM: That's a good point. THat's a reasonable thing to try to do. I don't have a particular place right now, but I will come up with something.

YSV: This was partially covered by BFS and others, but from my perspective we were talking about potentially downgrading this to stage 2 and that sounds like removing the API. So if we were to do that, I’m not sure we would solve the concern about the black box plugin that was raised, and I feel like that might be one of the crucial things that we are trying to avoid. I'm wondering if removing this really addresses the underlying concern.

KM: I think the concern is partly that the adding of API where the sole purpose is to promote this kind of black box application without having clear answers for making sure that we’re at the same time promoting ways for them to avoid the historical faults of those types of applications is a good idea. And some of that is just outside the scope of this committee, that’s part of the web as a platform, which is why I’m not opposed to saying it’s normative optional and the embedding spec can choose to enable it or not for use cases that are not on the web.

YSV: I think that this optional approach might work but I’m not sure that this use case is not required for the web especially with the existence of WASM, If we don't have this API people will find a way to do this: it is possible. The behaviour it enables in an ergonomic way will be possible, even without it. And I understand your point about not wanting to encourage that, but not having it will not necessarily prevent it. So I would be very interested in hearing how we would mitigate certain kinds of behaviors via API design. It seems that there are two directions that you are proposing: one of them is making it normative optional, the other one is making it a separate proposal. I'm worried about the separate proposal because I feel that it might be put on the side.

KM: That’s a fair point. I think either option is fine.

MM: Is there a possibility we could get consensus to keeping it in this proposal and keeping it normative optional? I would agree to normative optional.

YSV: Yeah, I would agree to normative optional as well.

KM: I think it sounds like there’s no disagreement unless others want to speak up.

SYG: Chrome would agree with normative optional, but Iwant to clarify something that KM. It's not up to the host implementation to decide. What normative optional would mean here is that we move this discussion over to HTML to resolve from there. From TC39’s point of view our work is on track - we would be leaving some of the work out from the JS platform and for the HTML spec to decide. Does that sound good?

KM: Yes.

YSV: Yep.

SYG: It sounds like all the browsers are in agreement. For Chrome, until that is hashed out there is nothing blocking us from adopting the rest of WeakRefs. I think that this is out of scope for TC39. The concern is that it's a strategic disagreement from WebKit leadership on the direction of the web platform, and TC39 has a large influence, but this particular corner of it is not within our purview. Given the other allowances we have given in 262 for normative optional it seems fine to me. And I do see other folks addressing- I just wanted to point out that KM has pointed out that this is a disagreement from leadership, and a lot of the queue items are trying to convince KM to change his mind, and I think what he’s saying is that that’s not possible. I think we should focus on moving forward.

DE: I’m happy with normative optional.

YSV: The previous day we discussed this, the issue was cleanupSome on the main thread. Do we have a direction forward for that? A couple of solutions were mentioned, but I think this is something we should address.

KM: Yeah that’s fair, I think that might be worth considering that in addition to being normative optional putting in a new bit or having a canBlock bit, I don’t have a particular preference there, but just allowing a particular host - on a per agent basis.

DE: I'm not really sure whether having a canBlock bit corresponds to blocking on the main thread. So I think we would have to discuss this within HTML whether, as a broader issue, we want to have such a concept.

SYG: I think what normative optional means is that the stakeholders here should follow up with HTML, because the main stakeholders here are the web browsers, so it’s up to the host to decide what is allowed and disallowed.

KM: I just mean that there is a question of - normative optional means either you have the property or you don’t. So you may want to have that’s like I throw on the main thread - or maybe not throw, whatever semantics we desire, but-

SYG: So narrowly normative optional means allowing behavior that can be there or not be there. Specifically, does anyone here want it to always be there, but to have different behavior depending on the thread?

DE: I think it would be better to be there or not there. If we make it not there it is easier to feature detect. I think normative optional gives the exact right amount of power to hosts. We already have hosts that require things that are normative optional to be present, for example HTML requires Intl to be present. I think this is the most parsimonious host hook we could provide - we were previously talking about parsimony of host hooks, so the cases where it is present or not present or whether it is never present on the web, that is the simplest way to do it.

GCL: I wanted to point ot the distinction of main thread at a spec level might not be ideal, because Node is OK putting this API on its main thread.  And JS setting things aside for the main thread might be a problem in that regard.

KM: That wasn't the intention.  Just like you have a canBlock flag, you would have a can synchronized.

GCL: Ok

MM: I just want to clarify that my agreement to consensus is specifically for literally normative optional, i.e. that the signal is the presence or absence of a property.

SYG: Keith..?

KM: I’m happy with that solution.

SYG: Are there any objections to making cleanup on FinalizationRegistration.prototype optional, so that the only power admitted to hosts is whether at Realm creation time it be there or not on the prototype, and that the stakeholders follow up on the HTML spec for the layering PR to debate it out what to do on the different threads.

(silence)

KM: One quick note. I would like to apologize for bringing up this so late.

### Conclusion/Resolution
- Consensus on making cleanup on FinalizationRegistration.prototype literally normative optional.
- Stakeholders to follow up on the HTML spec for the layering PR to debate on what to do on different threads.

## Decorators update / Call for participation

Presenter: Daniel Ehrenberg (DE)

- [proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators)
- [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ZJyQ85rHmtD22IqGEyCoy0Pt9D6LCXeafhUAuAbwQG0/edit#slide=id.p
)

DE: (presents slides)

No comments.

AKI: The last time decorators were on the agenda, it was a deep deep queue… very surprising that there's no queue today.  Is the lack of a queue because people are good and going to work on this offline, or is it because people are tired?

MM: Dan was not proposing anything, but just updating on what has happened so far.

GMS: The title says "call for participation": was there a call for participation?

DE: Please email me if you want an invitation.

## Vote on ECMA262 2020 spec draft

Presenter: Jordan Harband (JHD)


JHD: I have created a GH release for 2020, I have posted it on the reflector. The URL for the main spec is https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/releases/download/es2020/ECMA-262.11th.edition.June.2020.pdf  (GH is down at the moment, I will upload the PDF) We are asking if there is consensus for approval to send this to ECMA.

MBS: Thank you JHD. Let’s look at the queue.

WH: I looked at the Regex fix PR yesterday, it looks great to me. Is it your understanding that it got included in the spec?

JHD: Yes, absolutely.

KG: That was a follow up fix put in this morning, but it is also included.

WH: Ok. Thank you.

JHD: At the moment there is nothing in the master branch that is not also in the 2020 spec aside from year increments.

MBS: I think the next thing for us to do is a call through the company names for an official vote. Iw ould appreciate one delegate from each organization to chime in. If your company was not called, please chime in on the chat/IRC, and I'll make sure to give you an opportunity

- Facebook (TMV): Yes
- Google (WH): Yes
- Hitachi: does not participate in TC39
- IBM: not on call
- Intel: not on call
- Konica-Minolta: does not participate in TC39
- Microsoft (BT): Yes
- PayPal (AKI): Yes
- Stripe (POK): Yes
- Airbnb: not on call
- Alibaba (MQW): Yes
- Apple (MLS): Yes
- Bloomberg (API): Yes
- Canon: not on call
- Dell Technologies: not on call
- F5 Networks (KG): yes
- GoDaddy (BFS): Yes in IRC,, will follow up
- HP: does not participate in TC39
- Huawei: not on call
- Netflix (GHO): yes
- Salesforce: not on call
- Sony Interactive Entertainment (RKG): Yes
- 360 Technology Group (JHX): yes
- Evernote (IT): Yes
- Head Acoustics: not on call
- Igalia (CLA): Yes
- Meteor Development Group (aka Apollo) (BN): yes
- Agoric (CM, MM): yes
- Bocoup (RW): yes
- MetaMask: not on call
- Moddable (PHO): Yes
- Sujitech (JWK): yes
- Tilde: not on call
- Mozilla (YSV): Yes
- OpenJS Foundation (GCL): Yes
- Leiden University: not on call

JHD: For the record, this year the PDF version will have page numbers and better formatting. Please let me know if there’s issues with it.

WH: Do the links in the table of contents work?

JHD: There are clickable links in the TOC and all the pages as well.

LEO: Just for the record I think the opt-out period applies to Ecma-402, just in case.

MBS: Do you have anything to say about Ecma-402 as well?
LEO: On tues I mentioned that I have been looking for volunteers for the editorship for Ecma-402 from now on - consider this 2021 exercise. I haven’t heard from anyone else, and I’m in a very limited capacity. And I’m very much hoping to find someone else to work on the editorship and this person would be very welcome by the TC39-TG2. Please volunteer here, otherwise I will open a thread on the reflector.

AKI: Just think about the fame and prestige!

(silence)

MBS: If you are interested in helping with the editorship, it would be much appreciated.
### Conclusion/Resolution
- The vote for ECMAScript 2020 passes

## Incubator call chartering

Presenter: Shu-yu Guo (SYG)

- [slides](url)

SYG: (presents slides)

MM: In order to participate, not every meeting is going to be on all topics. Requiring attendence of all meetings in order to catch Realms is a lot.

SYG: The agenda is locked down a week ahead of time. As the facilitator I will ping you, and look out at the agenda when this is added, and propose the Realms/compartments stakeholders to add it to the agenda. I will ping you so that you don’t have to look out.

MM: I'm a co-champion on both. Speaking for myself, the answer is yes. As long as there is a reasonable number of meetings, I would be happy partecipate.

SYG: Given - how many weeks are there between plenaries - 8, 9? We will probably have no more than 4 or five of these meetings between plenaries.

MM: Thanks for clarifying. With that clarification - yes unless there is an emergency.

SYG: Please add things to the agenda a week at a time, keeping in mind the hour limit. We won't probably talk about more than one of two particular proposals at time. Part of the call for participation is to - If I know that you are a stakeholder and I think that the call would benefit from your coming, I will reach out to you personally and ping on GitHub if that is ok.

MBS: I from the module attributes team is interested in these calls. Having this time in between will be great. The times that you have proposed here, 9AM does overlap with PT/ET/CET, but it isn’t great for people in the APAC region. I was curious if you had any thoughts or plans for people in those regions that want to participate?

SYG: Not right now. Given that I have - I think that Hax's proposal would benefit from this, and I assume that Hax is in the China timezone.

MBS: Yes. I think it would be prudent to have a call at least once a quarter to have a call that is flexible for people in the APAC region. But I think it would be really unfortunate if we did not have that flexibility.

SYG: Given the proposals that I think it would benefit to be discussed in the calls, it sounds like there needs to be some heads up but we need to decide on an APAC friendly timezone.

MBS: Once the schedule has been locked, perhaps something like a doodle could be used to find the most convenient time. I was lucky that I checked my calendar and this time actually happens to be open. Might be also worthwhile also considering at least one of the meetings be flexible based on people’s availability.

SYG: That sounds good. I think the probably easiest path there is that consider the 9am PT time there for the next meeting.I think it will be helpful except when there are conflicts. Because the stakeholders will shift over time. When we want to discuss something that would preclude a set of stakeholders from showing up, we would use something like Doodle, or the advanced grid system you showed me that is in use for the Node.js meetings.

YSV: I checked my calendar and April 14 does work, I’m happy to do this time, the one question I have is, how much prep do you expect before this meeting?

SYG: For the very first meeting I would expect nothing. The rolling expectation going forward is that what’s going to come up in these calls is: here’s some feedback I thought of, possibly off-the-cuff possibly prepared, and that the next call, the expectation is there would be some kind of response to that.

YSV: Ok. Let’s see how the first couple go and we can iterate from there.

DE: I want to agree with what SYG is saying, from the outreach calls we are doing, it is good to post materials and it is good that attendees will learn over time. But you end up having to read the room and just see what many people know and work from there, so I think we can just take this dynamically, give people background reading to do, and take things from there.

YSV: It would be helpful to understand what it's being talked about better, for example for TypedArrays which aren't my area of expertise. But having supplemental material to prepare and keeping that a reasonable workload for the given time period would also be really helpful.

DE: There are going to be a lot of attendees that don’t have a lot of time to prepare for these.And that’s how TC39 meetings go too, people make presentations that have background material linked but not everyone reads it ahead of time because that’s just the way things are.

SYG: That sounds right to me. I think that as an aspirational thing, when putting stuff on the agenda that folks want to talk about for these proposals, I would recommend having the agenda item focusing on an issue: something that you actually want feedback about rather than talking about something as broad as the proposal itself. So for what to prepare, I will at least strive when I put stuff on the agenda to link to an issue or something brought up in the notes, in general to bring up something we didn’t resolve before rather than just to talk about the proposal itself. I don’t think there should be an expectation that there should be a lot of prep work done. Another goal of this is a lower-stakes venue for mentorship - these don’t really have to be… the feedback that you want is ultimately to help champions and stakeholders to polish their proposals to better present to committee. Some of that is technical feedback. Some of that is what do folks think about the next steps. I want to keep it low-stakes, so that you can come unprepared so long as you are willing to engage and provide feedback. There’s some honor system there, right you shouldn’t come completely unprepared for what the proposal is and give inconsistent feedback.

WH: Are you talking about participants or proposers when recommending that folks can come unprepared?

SYG: I’m talking about participants.


WH: Ok, that wasn’t clear.

WH: What is the mechanism for, if when you look at the agenda for a particular meeting, you think there’s an item that you should be in the discussion for, but you cannot make that particular meeting? What’s the mechanism to request deferral?

SYG: I was planning that it be handled on the reflector or on a github issue thread. Like we have an issue thread for each plenary meeting, there would be an issue thread for the upcoming call.
If the core stakeholders for an agenda item cannot make it, then if time allows we do a doodle, if we cannot find a time we can cancel that meeting. But if the people cannot make it, then the people who want the feedback or want to hear the feedback cannot hear it, then we call it off.

WH: Sounds like there is a high bar to rescheduling the meeting. That concerns me.

SYG: Why is there a high bar?

DE: We’ve been having outreach group calls for more than a year now and those have a similar non normative status as incubator calls, We never really had to do this rescheduling because it’s just a venue to talk to some people, it’s not a place where we’re coming to conclusions. I like the idea of having these issues, it is a much more organized way than the outreach calls have been doing it. Having issues where people can talk about their conflicts and talk about it a week in advance, because it’s posted you can easily talk about your conflict ahead of time. This seems like a great improvement on what we have already been doing with things that don't have an official status.

SYG: I don’t want to really put too much pressure on folks if they cannot make it. It’s setting a regular time slot aside so that folks that want to move at a faster velocity for proposals have a sanctioned place for that. If you cannot make it, or the other stakeholders cannot make it, the failure mode here is that you have to wait a little bit longer, it’s not catastrophic, so I don’t think there shouldn’t be a high bar to rescheduling.

WH: We'll see how it goes.

AKI: I just wanted to point out that of course scheduling is going to be difficult because we are all in different timezones, etc.
However, I think these are awesome, and I’m really excited about the group calls, I’m excited about what can come out of this. I’m really looking forward to the progress early stage proposals can make when they have access to early feedback.

SYG: Thank you.

RPR: Queue is empty.

SYG: I think that’s it. Look out for a reflector thread, and a thread on the agenda repo that I will transfer to TC39. I will reach out to stakeholders. Let’s try to get this ball rolling. Again, no pressure, I don’t want this to be a mini-TC39. Thank you.

JRL: One question. Is this going to be open to external people or is it just restricted to TC39 delegates?

SYG: For now, restrict to delegates and invited experts. If they’re currently not a TC39 member we go through the same IPR policy as for invited experts. Part of the intended goal is that there are less surprises and less off the cuff things during plenary. If the feedback that's given ends up not having relevance in TC39 itself, that ends up not serving that goal as well.

### Conclusion/Resolution
- SYG will create a Reflector thread, move the agenda repo into the TC39 org, and reach out to stakeholders interested in attending the incubator calls.

## Discuss process changes we implemented in February to accommodate US members and US delegates

Presenter: Myles Borins (MBS)

- [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1YXXKK9bUTyLjlq5fgJXZVx2TSNeduTgQZ-8lqRdwmc4/edit)

MBS: (Presents slides)

JHD: The sense I had at the end of that was that there was not consensus, that we were doing it as a forced emergency response.  So I am pretty sure I made clear that it was in the notes that this was begrudging acceptance because it’s more important to allow all our delegates to participate than to preserve the way things are, but my question is now it has been two months, has there been any updates from those delegates on relaxing that interpretation?

MF: I don’t think it was a minority of member companies that had concerns of participation due to this. We haven’t asked member companies to state that they have concerns about it but I spoke to a number of other representatives who voiced concerns, and then when we discussed this there were more people who had concerns, so I really don’t think it is just going to go away.

JHD: That's maybe true, and I had a number of conversations with representatives of companies who were not permitted to make a statement on behalf of their company.
But the bulk of the opinions that I heard were essentially that we need to be more careful to comply with the regulations, but that that doesn’t mean we can’t have no private spaces. There was at least one member company, maybe more that insisted that we have no private spaces. So if in fact there are a large number of companies for whom that is a hard line, then so be it, that may never change. But that was not the impression I got during the discussion in the last meeting.

MM: My impression aligns with JHD.

AKI: I spent basically from the middle of our meeting in Dec through the middle of our meeting in Feb on the phone with attorneys with a ton of member companies. And it consumed my every working minute coming up with a solution to it. So maybe the delegates don't really care, but most of their attorneys did.

JHD: And that’s fine too but maybe the information I need is some sort of anonymized description of exactly what all the requirements were here. Because I appreciate that a lot of working time went into coming up with this list and that satisfies everyone, but I’m just wondering-

DE: I think AKI’s testimony constitutes that. I wasted a lot of time on this. I'm really happy that we have this proposal now. None of us can give legal advice to other companies, so I’m not going to say whether or not it’s appropriate for people to participate in the absence of this policy, but this is a thing! The fact that we are all talking about is enough evidence. I don’t think there is any more beyond the backchanneling that is feasible to collect.

JHD: And I see this point of order, I’ll be happy to answer your question MBS.

MBS: I just want to add this point of order, I want to debate the feedback, not the premise. I think debating the premise doesn’t really get anywhere. I think if we’ve made changes that people want to see changed, then people should raise that issue to us and that has much better chances of moving forward than has debating whether or not we have this issue.

JHD: The specific feedback is that I feel uncomfortable with all of our technical feedback being public. I feel that it has the effect on others. There’s a very big difference between having a technical discussion in a hallway and having a technical discussion that will be logged that you can be held accountable for 10 years later. The specific request would be that the previously private technical spaces be made private again. You’re saying stay away from the premise, but the premise is the only reason-

MBS: What I am asking for specifically, you are speaking in broad strokes.

JHD: #tc39-delegates should be private, and technical discussion should be allowed in the Reflector.

MBS: That is a much more specific thing to ask, and something that we can bring to folks.

JHD: All of this with the understanding that any such private technical discussion should be summarized and documented if it's going to lead to a change or even a confirmation of no change, and announced publicly. I’m not asking that things are secret. Not that the conversation is public, but that the notes are public.Similarly I want our conversation to be allowed to be public, and then publicly share a summary of that.

MBS: So I think with that in mind then, JHD what maybe be helpful, is likely the request of re-locking down channels needs to be paired with an explicit process to disclose the discussion that would happen in there, and then consensus needs to be built across all the attorneys that this was built upon. Otherwise we risk losing delegates from being active. I'm not saying that this is not something we should be doing, I just think that it is the process to make this change.

JHD: Cool, I will talk to you offline about how you can help me pursue that. Obviously I prioritize participation, I don’t want anyone’s lawyers yanking them from meetings.

MBS: I think the one thing I would point out is about scale, we talked about 18 pages of notes, that does not include any of the conversation on the IRC channel, the number one challenge is how do we accomodate the request without end up creating an amount of work that it's not really possible to scale.

JHD: That is fair.

CM: You listed the delegates area on Discourse, some of the discussion had to do with community management, which we wouldn’t necessarily want in the public sphere. On the Discourse side, I was a little concerned about making all of that blanketly public.

MBS: How much discussion was happening that was non technical, could moving all of that discussion to the reflector acceptable?

CM: This was specifically hearkening back to a thread I was involved in a few months back which was basically, what do we do about people who are being really really stupid? And any kind of discussion like that in the public view is going to be really unconstructive and inflammatory, but there was no technical discussion there. It was specifically about managing the Discourse site itself so I think it would be most appropriate to happen there.

MBS: I guess the two thoughts that I have, and I don't have a strong feeling either way, is that having a lot of places for a discussion might split it.

CM: This is specifically an administrative non technical discussion and falls outside of the things we need to disclose here.

MBS: I guess what I mean is that I'm trying to understand how that discussion on Discourse should relate to the CoC we have on GitHub.

CM: Because this was specifically about how do we do community management in Discourse.

AKI: I’m the one who moved the topic. I agree that having a meta spot on discourse to talk about discourse is a good idea. Because it wasn’t a CoC violation, it wasn’t really germane to the reflector, and it was really about hey, in these conversations that we’re having right here, how do we do this better. And also what’s the kindest way we can tell someone that’s a really terrible idea. And it’s not an embarrassing conversation to have, but you don’t want to have it in public because you don’t want to embarrass people. I think there’s value with having both, I think that’s a workable solution.

CM: I don’t think it is a high volume thing but will be useful.

MBS: I apologize if I didn’t understand your request specifically.

CM: No it’s fine.

MBS: We should find the policy for transferring technical discussion, so we can think about how to handle a scenario where technical discussion start in that channel, and how do we deal with that.

CM: Technical discussions can pop up anywhere, and we need to be prepared to deal with that.

GCL: As someone who participated in TC39 as a non-delegate, even if it is not the ideal situation, Making things more public in the technical aspect to me is a good thing. We should continue to keep that point in mind for people who are collaborating from an outside perspective.

AKI: I’m wondering for those of you who were at the meeting in Feb either in person or on the zoom call, if you were taken by surprise by the conversation, did you go back to your company and speak to your attorneys? No judgement - or did you leave the meeting and forget about it?

JHD: To be clear, there wasn't any public discussion (not even between delegates) about communication about some companies joining Ecma. It was all backchannel communication, everyone might not have heard about the problems.

AKI: It was discussed in Dec?

JHD: Out loud in the meeting?

AKI: I don’t know if it made it into the notes, but that’s how I learned about it was in the meeting in Dec.

MF: That information was given to all ECMA members through email. We were at least all made aware of new membership. What implications that had for us legally was on our own.

MM: Agoric and myself were certainly surprised in Jan, we did not talk to counsel.

DE: The exe-com is something all member companies can send a delegate to. We in the ECMA exe-com, where I am a member want to help resolve these issues. Please let me or MBS or JBN know if you need help with GA things as you are entitled to be.

RPR: The queue is empty, MBS has had to leave, so I think that means this topic is ended.

KG: I want to answer JHD's original question. We have no reason to believe our lawyers changed their position.

JHD: I assume the implication is that you have no reason to believe they ever will?

KG: Pending further guidance from US government or a change in which companies are on the entity list or which companies are members of Ecma, that’s correct.

JHD: Ok. Thank you.

AKI: If I may interject, `pending new guidance from the BIS or the US government`, it is not out of the realm of possibility. They are a fickle people. The odds of a new policy tomorrow or Jan 22nd is possible.

MBS: One think that I think it's worth keeping in mind is that export control stuff is not going to be talking about specific companies, but rather ECMA's response to export control in general. It is prudent for us to have policies that are strong for any export control, this time it was one company and one government, but we don’t know what it would be in the future. So having policies in place that protect us from it - I think that it allows us to avoid the kind of fire drill we had in Dec. I for one, would not be in favor of making changes that did not follow a path that I talked about with JHD, that came with a clear process for council, which having done that from Nov until Jan I can say that it's a lot of work. That is not meant to be discouraging.

GHO: Point of order: full names and company names in Zoom, please.

DE: MBS asked a specific question about whether we want to have this again in the committee or in the chair group. Did we get a response from the committee to that question?

MM: My preference would be that if there’s no surprises, if it’s just kind of going along the way everyone would expect it, I would not enjoy spending time on it. But if there’s a surprise I would very much want to bring it to the committee.

DE: So just as a possible way forward: if these things were notified in the reflector then we could proceed asynchronously in that way and if someone had a concern about this topic we could discuss it there.

MM: Yes, that would be fine with me.

MF: I want to make it clear that we don’t make changes to any of the decisions we’ve made, only within the chair. That would wait for feedback within the reflector thread.

DE: Yeah, this would be about implementing those consensus decisions that we reached consensus on last meeting and narrowing down the concrete details.

MF: Ok.

DE: So I'm happy that this can be asynchronous.

MBS: Is the action item to follow through on all of the action items including the new one from CM?

DE: And to follow through with them posting the proposed resolution to the reflector? I agree with you about that.

MBS: I guess the ast thing there would be: do we want to add this again in the June agenda as a follow up, or is it ok to just follow up on the Reflector. I think we should just handle it on the reflector, I don’t think this needs more committee time unless there’s an explicit proposal for changes. Does anyone disagree with that?

DE: I just want to say, even if we agree with this now, we should agree with the concrete policy on the reflector, and if anyone wants to bring it to the
But we would have it be async only by default.

MBS: I just want to make sure that if there is anything else about this, that can be on the Reflector.
### Conclusion/Resolution
- Further discussion will continue on the reflector for now.


## Hubs Hubs Hubs

Presenter: Yulia Startsev (YSV)

YSV: Hubs was contentious, it didn’t go over as we wanted but I also got a lot of possible feedback. I spoke with the team at Mozilla and they’re very excited and want to make it better. If you have feedback please drop it on the Github issue about how to do the hallway track, and I’ll pass it on, and if you have specific concerns I’m happy to hop on Hubs after the meeting and do a quick demo.

WH: It’s fun! You can fly around, explore the environment, create ducks. There are also CPU issues, performance issues.

YSV: Yeah, that’s the main issue, let’s hope to make that better.

MBS: With this we conclude the first fully remote meeting of TC39. Congratulations!
